planner: update doc for Instance plan cache (#21017)
pingcap/docs: sql-prepared-plan-cache.md

TiDB also supports execution plan caching for some non-`PREPARE` statements, similar to the `Prepare`/`Execute` statements. For more details, refer to [Non-prepared plan cache](/sql-non-prepared-plan-cache.md).

> ## Session and Instance Level Prepared Plan Cache

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Session-level and instance-level Prepared Plan Cache
```

TiDB supports both session-level plan cache and instance-level plan cache. Session-level plan cache maintains a separate cache for each session, while instance-level plan cache maintains a single shared cache across all sessions in an instance.

> You can use [`tidb_enable_instance_plan_cache`](/system-variables.md#tidb_enable_instance_plan_cache-new-in-v840) to enable or disable instance-level plan cache. When this variable is set to `ON`, instance-level plan cache is used; otherwise, session-level plan cache is used.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To enable or disable instance-level plan cache, you can use the [`tidb_enable_instance_plan_cache`](/system-variables.md#tidb_enable_instance_plan_cache-new-in-v840) system variable. When you set this variable to `ON`, instance-level plan cache is used. Otherwise, session-level plan cache is used.
```

> Plans can be shared across different sessions when [`tidb_enable_instance_plan_cache`](/system-variables.md#tidb_enable_instance_plan_cache-new-in-v840) is `ON`:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When you set `tidb_enable_instance_plan_cache` to `ON`, plans can be shared across different sessions. The following is an example:
```

```sql
-- Execute the following SQL statements in session 1.
mysql> PREPARE st FROM "SELECT a FROM t WHERE a<?";
Query OK, 0 rows affected (0.00 sec)

mysql> SET @a=1;
Query OK, 0 rows affected (0.00 sec)

mysql> EXECUTE st USING @a;
Empty set (0.01 sec)

-- Execute the following SQL statements in session 2.
mysql> PREPARE st FROM "SELECT a FROM t WHERE a<?";
Query OK, 0 rows affected (0.00 sec)

mysql> SET @a=30;
Query OK, 0 rows affected (0.00 sec)

mysql> EXECUTE st USING @a;
Empty set (0.01 sec)

mysql> SELECT @@last_plan_from_cache;
+------------------------+
| @@last_plan_from_cache |
+------------------------+
|                      1 |
+------------------------+
```

> Starting from v8.5.0, TiDB provides two system tables that allow you to view entries in the instance-level plan cache:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Starting from v8.5.0, TiDB provides two system tables to view entries in the instance-level plan cache:
```

* `information_schema.tidb_plan_cache`: shows entries of instance plan cache in the current TiDB instance.

> * `information_schema.cluster_tidb_plan_cache`: shows entries of instance plan cache from all available TiDB instances.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* `information_schema.cluster_tidb_plan_cache`: shows entries of instance plan cache across all available TiDB instances.

The following example shows how to view entries in `information_schema.tidb_plan_cache`:
```

```sql

> mysql> select *, tidb_decode_binary_plan(binary_plan) from information_schema.tidb_plan_cache\G

Reviewer: ```suggestion
mysql> SELECT *, tidb_decode_binary_plan(binary_plan) FROM information_schema.tidb_plan_cache\G
```

                             BINDING: 
                             OPT_ENV: af3d96834213de7624b07a2991ba8c4579c86054423f651a15d3a7246f35920f
                        PARSE_VALUES: 1
                            MEM_SIZE: 10786
                          EXECUTIONS: 2
                      PROCESSED_KEYS: 0
                          TOTAL_KEYS: 0
                         SUM_LATENCY: 10011084
                           LOAD_TIME: 2025-05-22 14:49:47
                    LAST_ACTIVE_TIME: 2025-05-22 14:50:54
tidb_decode_binary_plan(binary_plan): 
| id                  | estRows  | estCost    | task      | access object | operator info                   |
| TableReader_7       | 3323.33  | 318637.76  | root      |               | data:Selection_6                |
| └─Selection_6       | 3323.33  | 4569000.00 | cop[tikv] |               | lt(test.t.a, 1)                 |
|   └─TableFullScan_5 | 10000.00 | 4070000.00 | cop[tikv] | table:t       | keep order:false, stats:pseudo  |
```

> ## Prepared Plan Cache Restrictions

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Prepared Plan Cache restrictions
```

TiDB also supports execution plan caching for some non-`PREPARE` statements, similar to the `Prepare`/`Execute` statements. For more details, refer to [Non-prepared plan cache](/sql-non-prepared-plan-cache.md).

## Session-level and instance-level Prepared Plan Cache

> TiDB supports both session-level plan cache and instance-level plan cache. Session-level plan cache maintains a separate cache for each session, while instance-level plan cache maintains a single shared cache across all sessions in an instance.

Reviewer 2: We shall recommend customers to select instances plan cache, as as it cached more plans with given memory size. Otherwise, customers would have doubts on which one should be choosen.

Reviewer 2: Any scenario we recommend session plan cache?

> To enable or disable instance-level plan cache, you can use the [`tidb_enable_instance_plan_cache`](/system-variables.md#tidb_enable_instance_plan_cache-new-in-v840) system variable. When you set this variable to `ON`, instance-level plan cache is used. Otherwise, session-level plan cache is used.

Reviewer 2: The initial size of instance plan cache is small. We'd better mention setting proper cache size, and how the purging works. 

![image](https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/a797deff-d67b-4fa9-ad84-f8aee5208506)

When you set `tidb_enable_instance_plan_cache` to `ON`, plans can be shared across different sessions. The following is an example:

```sql
-- Execute the following SQL statements in session 1.
mysql> PREPARE st FROM "SELECT a FROM t WHERE a<?";
Query OK, 0 rows affected (0.00 sec)

mysql> SET @a=1;
Query OK, 0 rows affected (0.00 sec)

mysql> EXECUTE st USING @a;
Empty set (0.01 sec)

-- Execute the following SQL statements in session 2.
mysql> PREPARE st FROM "SELECT a FROM t WHERE a<?";
Query OK, 0 rows affected (0.00 sec)

mysql> SET @a=30;
Query OK, 0 rows affected (0.00 sec)

mysql> EXECUTE st USING @a;
Empty set (0.01 sec)

mysql> SELECT @@last_plan_from_cache;
+------------------------+
| @@last_plan_from_cache |
+------------------------+
|                      1 |
+------------------------+
```

Starting from v8.5.0, TiDB provides two system tables to view entries in the instance-level plan cache:

* `information_schema.tidb_plan_cache`: shows entries of instance plan cache in the current TiDB instance.

> * `information_schema.cluster_tidb_plan_cache`: shows entries of instance plan cache across all available TiDB instances.

Reviewer 2: Shall we include a page to describe the view under https://docs.pingcap.com/zh/tidb/stable/information-schema/ ?

![grafana_panels](/media/planCache-memoryUsage-planNum-panels.png)

<CustomContent platform="tidb">

Due to memory limits, plan cache entries might be missed. You can check this status by viewing the [`Plan Cache Miss OPS` metric](/grafana-tidb-dashboard.md) in the Grafana dashboard.

</CustomContent>

<CustomContent platform="tidb-cloud">

Due to memory limits, plan cache entries might be missed.

</CustomContent>

> ### Session Level Plan Cache Memory Management

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Memory management of session-level plan cache
```

You can control the threshold by configuring the system variable `tidb_prepared_plan_cache_memory_guard_ratio`. The threshold is 0.1 by default, which means when the unused memory of the TiDB server is less than 10% of the total memory (90% of the memory is used), the memory protection mechanism is triggered.

> ### Instance Level Plan Cache Memory Management

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Memory management of instance-level plan cache
```

> You can use the `tidb_instance_plan_cache_max_size` system variable to set the total memory limit for the Instance Plan Cache. For example, `set global tidb_instance_plan_cache_max_size=200MiB`.

Reviewer: ````suggestion
You can use the [`tidb_instance_plan_cache_max_size`](/system-variables.md#tidb_instance_plan_cache_max_size-new-in-v840) system variable to set the maximum memory usage for the instance-level plan cache. For example, to set the cache limit to 200 MiB:

```sql
SET GLOBAL tidb_instance_plan_cache_max_size = 200MiB
```
````

> TiDB purges the Instance Plan Cache periodically. You can use the `tidb_instance_plan_cache_reserved_percentage` system variable to control the amount of memory purged each time. For example, if the default percentage is `0.1` and the maximum cache size is `200MiB`, TiDB purges `200 * 0.1 = 20MiB` of memory each time.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
TiDB purges the instance-level plan cache periodically. You can control the amount of memory purged each time by using the [`tidb_instance_plan_cache_reserved_percentage`](/system-variables.md#tidb_instance_plan_cache_reserved_percentage-new-in-v840) system variable. For example, if the default percentage is `0.1` and the maximum cache size is `200MiB`, TiDB purges `200 * 0.1 = 20MiB` of memory each time.
```

You can control the threshold by configuring the system variable `tidb_prepared_plan_cache_memory_guard_ratio`. The threshold is 0.1 by default, which means when the unused memory of the TiDB server is less than 10% of the total memory (90% of the memory is used), the memory protection mechanism is triggered.

### Memory management of instance-level plan cache

You can use the [`tidb_instance_plan_cache_max_size`](/system-variables.md#tidb_instance_plan_cache_max_size-new-in-v840) system variable to set the maximum memory usage for the instance-level plan cache. For example, to set the cache limit to 200 MiB:

```sql
SET GLOBAL tidb_instance_plan_cache_max_size = 200MiB
```

> TiDB purges the instance-level plan cache periodically. You can control the amount of memory purged each time by using the [`tidb_instance_plan_cache_reserved_percentage`](/system-variables.md#tidb_instance_plan_cache_reserved_percentage-new-in-v840) system variable. For example, if the default percentage is `0.1` and the maximum cache size is `200MiB`, TiDB purges `200 * 0.1 = 20MiB` of memory each time.

Reviewer 2: I previously created an illustration for this. Is it better to include it? 
![image](https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/1e313085-0ccf-48d6-a904-94fe74f1b1d7)

> TiDB purges the instance-level plan cache periodically. You can control the amount of memory purged each time by using the [`tidb_instance_plan_cache_reserved_percentage`](/system-variables.md#tidb_instance_plan_cache_reserved_percentage-new-in-v840) system variable. For example, if the default percentage is `0.1` and the maximum cache size is `200MiB`, TiDB purges `200 * 0.1 = 20MiB` of memory each time.

Author: Oh that's good, I'll update this part and add this picture into it.
